[Music]
hello and welcome to the BBC good food
podcast with Tom courage I'm Orlando and
we're here today to talk about citing
ingredients cooking techniques and
general kitchen chat plus we have an
original Tom carriage recipe for you to
try out at home whether you're a
beginner or a budding chef welcome back
to the BBC good food podcast with Tom
carriage rosie Berkut and me
Orlando Marin today we're going to be
talking about how to use up fruit and
veg especially those you've grown
yourself now um I know that our
listeners would like some practical help
for their garden problems so love them
like I'm cooking stuff yeah that's fine
in the garden how to fix the swing yeah
I could do that also how to tidy up dog
mess are very good at that anything else
in the garden no I don't buy gardening
problems that I mean having too much of
them please can you help us please can
you help us with tomatoes seem to be a
terrible problem for people any ideas
for tomatoes what how to use and yeah I
guess bad like a real good one to make
blended into a soup is fantastic or cook
it down and make an amazing kind of like
passata tomato sauce very very simple
but that way you can you've got it
cooked and you can freeze it in batches
if it's just need to bring it down in
size so do these them right away to get
the water out the water yeah cut the
tomatoes in half basically like sort of
throw in some chopped onions cut their
own sweat it down with some garlic and
then cut all the tomatoes in half throw
them in a little bit of tomato puree
some vinegar some sugar and a maybe a
crumbly like beef stock cube one of
those and then just cook it out for ages
and ages and ages and it comes down and
then you can puree it if you like or you
can just keep it chunky as it is but
that then uses a base for pasture
sources usually thickening it but put it
in into stews doing whatever it is that
way you've got it cooked out you can bag
it up a little freezer bags it's ticking
quite small bags so that you just pull
out one entire fantastic great ideas now
courgettes
these are a bit of a nightmare for
people as you've said they kind of crop
up all over the place and they get
bigger overnight so it's no good just
how you know using one we need quite
industrial solutions for these now we've
got a great recipe on the website for a
way of griddling them which will involve
disposing of a lot of courgettes on the
griddle and they shrink up on the
griddle so you can start off with quite
a lot and they get smaller any ideas for
other ideas for courgettes well one one
of the things it's similar to the
griddling but if you again harken back
to Sicily because obviously they have
amazing courgettes I went to a sandwich
shop where they this famous famous
sandwich shop called but bored dairy in
or TV market where they make the most
epic sandwiches sicilian sandwiches of
things of beauty and so he'd make this
huge sandwich needed that it was like
incredible buffalo mozzarella amazing
prosciutto tomatoes and then he got
these these marinated courgettes that
had been marinated and they were all
they were covered in olive oil and so if
you griddle courgettes if you if you
griddle them quite dry and then toss
them in a marinade of say like crushed
garlic thyme lemon juice lemon zest and
just do a load of them cover them in
that and then keep them in the fridge
and then use them in sandwiches or
salads like past that there'd be nice in
like kind of orzo salad or lovely
delicious
I mean that's like the dream but it is
they do make very good chutney so it's a
sort thing you could do you can like do
a really good chutney with them cooking
it like I mean like you would make any
other chutney in that base of sugar and
vinegar cooked out with onions and diced
up courgettes cooked and they keep for
ages they love and use quite a good
quantity of them as well oh yeah it's a
great way of using them up we saw a
great way of using a shame to waste them
isn't it yeah you don't always eat them
eat them raw they're so delicious raw so
just either very finely sliced them or
on a mandolin
and then they've got this amazing nutty
flavor a pinch of salt so they give it
they sort of dress themselves and their
own juices lemon juice olive oil shaved
parmesan basil and then artichoke hearts
from a jar ripped up and tossed through
there and then some like crunchy pine
nuts or some flower seeds or whatever
wonderful you remind me of a video that
I saw yesterday of an amazing sandwich
they're doing in New Jersey at the
moment which is a gigantic pickle heart
then you put all your ham and cheese in
the middle of it of the pickle then you
eat the pickle is the sandwich that
takes bread yeah good for a carb-free
diet now any ideas for runner beans
we've got a great recipe on the website
for runner beans with charred leeks and
vinaigrette so we just need to eat them
eat them eat them while we've got them
actually think they're quite nice if
they're if they're young and if they
don't have those fibrous and kind of
strengths take that off it's a bit
fiddly but when they're young very very
finely sliced them just you know across
ways so into into little if you finely
finely slice them they're really nice
and crunchy nice with say red onions
sumac salt olive oil lemon juice they
are love it they've got such an amazing
natural sweetness to them that they're
so beautiful and they're clean and crisp
and fresh they go really well with
something like harissa or chili so that
kind of counterbalance of the two things
together are amazing and nut oils they
go really well with Warner oil even a
little drizzle of sesame all those sort
of thing those those nutty that they're
really good for counterbalance big
flavors so that they're delicious so
that and you throw them in the
restaurant in that way wait no not in
that way no that's something I would do
at home that we would use them quite
often there be used as just as a very
simple side garnish just insulted but oh
that's it but but just when you want to
create something a little
bit more for home those came to balance
of flavors they work so because they
need to be eaten quite fast don't they
run the beans they're one of those
things that gets a bit stale like broad
beans get stale exactly starch and they
start beginning to get a little bit
boring and bland that's why you want you
on a pick'em cut and cook them straight
away serve it like peas you know yeah
and sweet corns another one where it's
just the graph collapses of the sugars
in the sweet corner as soon as it's been
picked so sometime we missed a podcast
and sweet corn fantastic the exciting
subject um lettuces are a bit of a
problem because you tend to plant a row
of lettuces so you get lots of letters
all at once do cook with lettuces Tom
all do yes with them baby gem lettuce is
a fantastic chargrilled they they're
absolutely stunning they're wonderful
you slice time things like romaine
lettuce very very thinly sliced stirred
into peas I mean peas bacon papaya
francais yeah lettuce even just stirred
into pasta dishes just slice slice slice
is stirred right through at the end
absolutely amazing way of bulking things
out but given a clean crispness of
flavor using them up really good cook
with lettuce definitely and we it's
gotta be the right sort of things like
oak leaf or la la rata or on diva things
they're not good but thinks I can things
like chickpeas are fantastic for that
you know radicchio those big strong
hearty flavors they're really good with
Italian dishes that that kind of that
kick of a kind of acidity and iron and
everything that you get that bit in it
you can get from those I think really
underused lettuce genuinely because it
has that that kind of juicy crunch to
which is really enjoyable but also it
has flavor really interesting for me the
ones are so good with things and
shellfish are great with cockles and
clams and mussels and very very simple
things and even lights put in a word for
the good old iceberg occasionally
because it's so refreshing that it's
almost like having a fizzy drink and
mouthful of ice but I am right in the
right place
fried chicken in a you know if you're
doing a
chicken bun ice boat it's got to be
iceberg prawn cocktail it's got yeah but
people well in this room icebergs are
welcome Oh icebergs are welcome I think
again that harks back to conversations
we've had before about childhood
memories and it was the lettuce that
everyone used to have as a kid in it I
mean I loved it an iceberg is great you
know it just don't to have it with fish
paste like I had fish paste and meat
paste to many sandwiches like and what
about freezing do you a good friend home
freezer Rosie do I have frozen broad
beans and peas when I've had too many
and I think they freeze really well
again if you if you freeze them after
picking them soon after picking them if
you know you're going to have too many
to do blanch them first no I would yeah
I was just if it was broad beans I would
take them out of the pods and freeze
them and then the same with peas I would
take them pod them and freeze them I
know a gardener who said to me that she
who has a tremendous problem of darts
running right through Christmas and
she's she swears by her dehydrator so
she's got a great big dehydration come
probably I mentioned it humming away
morning noon and night she puts these
things in entrees and they kind of
disappear and then she takes them out
and she I don't have quite the history
doesn't really what she does with them
at the other end but you would probably
turn those into restaurant dust wouldn't
you Tom a dustman no certain well some
things but mushrooms yes but most things
when they go through the dehydrator
it's about intensifying flavor it's the
same as like grapes and raisins do you I
mean that my happens is you take one
product that's prime then and then if
you've got too much of it the point of
MIT turn it into raisins you're
preserving process and same thing when
it comes to dehydration and what it does
is it crisps things up intensifies
flavor and it makes things delicious say
and they're good for garnish and things
throwing stuff through salads adding
bits and bobs texture and crunch as well
so yeah dehydrate is a they're a great
thing to have but like rosie touched on
earlier about the tomatoes you haven't
got to have a dehydrated just have the
oven on low you know it hasn't got the
airflow quite the same but just
that drying process but we would with
your oven Rosalee we're trying to make
the smartos kind of chewy and dryer
whereas this dehydrator gets all that it
does turn them does it just leave them
in long yeah yeah so how long you keep
them in the oven we'll have a fan and an
airflow things going on but essentially
you can do the same if you had it in a
loaf an oven you could do would you
would you pounded them in her because
you don't want like chunks of dehydrated
tomato you would you powder them all no
yeah like little kind of you know like
little sun dried tomatoes essentially
you go go a long way to make it tomorrow
and super dry you'd have to slice it
very thin and yeah I mean I get the
point
it's a preserving thing you know and and
but you could take it out stick it into
olive oil all of those sort of flavors
yeah I think what once there once said
dehydrated the the intensity of the
flavor you can infuse him with oil and
then you get the flavored oil rather
than just using the product so you know
there's loads of things you can do but
when you've got too much of a product if
you've been growing things yeah
the problem that I remember when I had a
restaurant was that I was very busy you
know cooking dinner that night and
suddenly something arrived that needed
dealing with so do you deputize some of
your staff to deal with thee you know
this vat of gooseberries have arrived I
mean when using a restaurant how many
staff did you have how many in the
kitchen me slightly different we got 22
so 22 chef so at some point somewhere
there's always someone doing something
rather than just service so yeah we've
grown from a point of being very simple
to being you know there's always process
that goes through you know yeah people
have prep jobs going on all the time
yeah and that's the beauty of a
restaurant isn't it that you can
constantly stay on top of stuff because
I do find at home sometimes you know and
I hate wasting food but it is work to
keep on top of all of the food so yeah
that's where a home cook you have to
enjoy doing it becomes yeah an amazing
hobby yeah because in the restaurant you
you can constantly just be creative with
someone
be doing that someone can be just just
dealing with the excess you know produce
or whatever and if we talk about fruit
however well organized your fruit grant
garden is so that you get like the fruit
coming in at stages it's always seems to
be the hottest day of the year that
you're stuck there having to make Jam
isn't it with you know bubbling vets of
Jam or waiting to be put into warm to
jam jars and you'd rather be out on the
beach wouldn't you yes it's tough for a
fruit grower I think isn't it I can't
speak from experience on that one
because I've asked yet to have enough
success with raspberry canes instrument
we had a handful of strawberries like
maybe a couple of handfuls but
definitely not not a glass but yeah I
mean I think with with well potentially
if you're making jams you could freeze
the fruits if you're going to cook it
down anyway
then you could probably freeze it to get
it and then save it for a cooler day and
then make the jam later there is a book
out called I think five seasons of jam
by Lilia brown which is that which says
that you can make preserve every single
day of the year so I wonder if that's
what she does yeah she all heard jams so
she's incredible she has a shop on the
Chatsworth Road and she makes really
Road in East London yeah it's in sort of
near Clapton rahmatan and she makes all
these incredible seasonal jams so she'll
do like BAE and blackberry or rhubarb
and vanilla and she's always using more
than one flavor in her gems so it's very
driven by the seasonal fruit and she
uses less sugar as well so they're very
fruit fruit based unless so the flavors
of the fruits really coming through but
then she'll use some kind of other
seasonal or interesting ingredient with
them and she's really she sells them
from and she sells them from the shop
but she also supplies a lot of
restaurants I think she supplies klepto
violet bakery and so she was a pastry
chef at st. John before she started
branching out I'm making Jam but yeah
her jams are so so inspiring and so
sometimes they put a flavoring into Jam
like the strawberry and violet was
something right there and and you think
all that
but you taste it and it's still
strawberry jam and you can't really you
really don't notice the other thing they
put in it it must be she must have a lot
of still if she if you can actually
taste the other thing she without it
wrecking it because you wouldn't
actually want a great dose of violets in
your strawberry jam would you like the
hardest thing with jams is to sugar
content because you need the sugar
content to provide the preservative is
who you want the Jam to last all year
round you know it's making something you
know jams have evolved because you go
you make something when the crop is
right now but that will get you through
the winter time so but this the sugar
there is a preserving agent that make
sure that has the longevity the problem
of that is that sugar masks so many
flavors so when you want to ice into it
you always have to try and find
something that can shine through with
sweetness you know that's the difficulty
then doesn't upset the balance of the
jam setting you know it could you could
do it with flavored vinegar or something
there's something that you think is an
acidity breaker but lemon or whatever
however by the time that it's set and
cut through it either alter the Jam
concert how it sits or how it texturally
works but also flavor-wise is very damn
making especially advanced Jam making is
actually quite I do think there's also
something to be said for making kind of
fresher compote style Jam so like the
exact problem that you're talking about
is the fact that you do need all that
sugar in order to preserve it all year
round but I sometimes make quite loose
jams with with less sugar still enough
sugar to make them a nice texture but
they might not preserve for longer than
a couple of weeks but you gonna eat them
because you're making small batches so
you're making a couple of jars and also
the nice thing if doing it is a compost
aisle is the fact that you can actually
freeze them down you're not making
something that's just set as a jealous
and jelly
yeah as a jelly you're actually making
something that is more of a like of a
dressing or a puree that you can then
freeze down and then just defrost and
gently warm back up so yeah so yeah
that's a nice way of doing it and
getting those extra flavors in yeah I
didn't know apricot and ginger one like
that which is very successful because it
was it was thinner than you know your
plastic gleaming Jam but it was still
thick enough to enjoy on on a bit of
bread fresh April yeah fresh apricots
when I was in France where you fresh
shaped
fall down at you if you walk along the
road don't they all those married French
fruits they really do have amazing soft
fruits there
Terri's falling raining down wherever
you look cherries are very good that I
have to say I don't think they are this
year and I thought they're spectacular
the only downside with cherries
University ma'am the season is just so
sure social it's just ridiculous
something so amazing so lush it's just
so so short and then when you buy the
ones in the supermarket they always look
amazing and they just taste of nothing
they're very shiny aren't they it should
be so depressing cause you go they taste
nothing nowhere near as good as they
look the best things are the little
stools at the side of the road like when
I'm driving through Ken and there's and
there's a sign saying local cherries or
is take a detour and just I just fill up
at the you know at the greengrocer brown
paper bags full of cherries they're such
a pain to pick cherries aren't able to
be charged at about a pound each because
they're their nightmare to get it they
don't up the tree for homes that you're
up a ladder trying to get the things off
they are very challenging fruit I think
you know we ought to have something to
eat at this point yeah we're going to
Karen because we're going to talk about
chutneys and pickles and pickle iliyan
things like that home but I don't know
about you I'm peckish let's um we've got
some griddled courgettes
and we've got some run of beans with
chard leagues lovely thank you excellent
that's Jack bringing that noisily
bringing it in there and we like the
noise that the food being unwrapped
that's why don't we like the crinkling
of foil I'm not sure the listeners are
gonna like the chewing noises though
quite well I don't I think they're
probably quite used to chart chewing
noises on this podcast Rosie there's not
at the arches where they do kissing
noises now that really is offensive it
really is and all that we hop sing in
and out of the room and we're not gonna
we're not gonna run - kissing noises on
this podcast are we silenced everyone
has me thank you I was just trying to
think you might kissing
still to come on TV secret Foods podcast
with Tom carriage well I don't want to
walk around smelling a vinegar that's
all but make them chutney naked by going
new clothes don't get too close ok in
case it spits don't worry about it have
a shower afterwards then you got chutney
for the next six months Rosie this is
the most gorgeous piece of greenery tell
us about this recipe so it's basically a
leeks vinaigrette which is quite a
classic French dish and a really lovely
way of using up leeks but using runner
beans as well so what you do is you
poach the leeks and simmering water
under a cartouche which is a piece of
grease proof pain I love that word
sounds difficult but it's not really
difficult it's always just it's just a
pieces well what I do is cut a square of
greaseproof paper and then fold it up
into a sort of you know into a triangle
and then cut it into the shape of your
pan by cutting the end off and then snip
a little the tip off to make a hole so
let the steam off and then you put that
on top of the leeks and it keeps them in
the water in it and steams them and
keeps them nicely poached and then once
you've poached them until they're tender
you take them out with a slotted spoon
and let them just steam off and then you
char them on a griddle pan or if you had
a barbecue going that would be perfect
because that would get some nice smoky
flavors in there and then you blanch the
run of beans until they're nice and
tender and then while it's use that your
cottage as well I wouldn't know I really
got this cartouche ready I mean it's
really about going into sort of bubbling
boiling water with the runner beans and
to keep them nice and green and then you
toss them into a vinaigrette made with
Dijon mustard red wine vinegar olive oil
castor sugar and anchovies and maybe a
little pinch of chilli because I'm
really bad for putting a pinch of chilli
and most things and then it's so it's a
lovely lovely thick glossy vinaigrette
which coats over
the warm green vegetables and then some
toasted one of my favorite things
toasted pumpkin seeds just give a lovely
nutty crunch as well and this would be
nice you were talking about runner beans
with nut oils it would be lovely with a
with a hazelnut or a walnut oil
fantastic so that's Rosie Burkitt's
runner beans and chard leaves with
vinaigrette and Tom your griddled
courgettes to get good marks on the
griddled courgette is that to get you
get the griddle pan like screaming heart
nice and hot like anything you cook on a
griddle pan you've got to get it nice
and hot but not not so hard that it can
completely digest burn them but and
leave them on there for long enough
don't be tempted to flip into her you
know to have a look because if you don't
look how do you know whether they you go
in instinct feel the force like a Jedi
that's what you need if you can the
griddle you want good stripes otherwise
why have you bothered that's the point
of grilling us but the problem with
having a look is if you never look you
know lose the position and then you put
it back down you could putting it down
in a different lines yeah just got a bit
practice feel the force become a
courgette Jedi well that recipe is also
on the website so happy cooking now
chutneys now that they're really in at
the moment Chinese um I'm not very fond
of that boiling vinegar smell through
the house but you have to put up with
that don't you that does part of making
chutney yeah but I mean it doesn't
always need that much vinegar it does it
always need that much acidity level not
always you know I think and it's also
that there's so many flavours and layers
that you can get through things by
putting them you know it the sugar
content is really important of course at
the beginning but then also there it is
about the fruit that goes in it and then
the vegetables and then you know the way
that it cooks out I mean I I don't think
he's a bad smell I mean of all the
things that go through the house you're
looking at chutney and who had one when
I was the magazine editor they used to
be like chutney week when the kitchen
was making chutneys and they used to
drift around the office with a trail of
vinegar behind them and I mean it
matter no one minded it was their job
but their entire beings were saturated
with vinegar smell for about a week I
believe that if you work in a chip shop
you you you smell of chips don't you and
fish and chips you some quite clingy
smells aren't they the frying of the
frying of anything yeah all if you say
you watch the garlic factory you smell
of garlic wouldn't you you would
definitely pick up the garlic smell I
think yeah well I don't want to walk
around smelling of vinegar that's all
but someone who works for 48 weeks a
year in a chip shop in a garden is very
different than someone who spends an
hour and a half making a chutney I do
have to say by the way they make them
chutney naked have a shower afterwards
then you got chutney for the next six
months also you don't like Tom said you
don't have to have these boiling vats of
vinegar like I make a the rhubarb well
it's a ketchup really rather than a
chutney but I make rhubarb ketchup and I
roast the rhubarb in the oven with sugar
vinegar and I foil it so it's not
completely filling the house seems you
do knit on that naked note it's time to
say goodbye thank you Tom and Rosie
please join us next week when we'll be
talking about how to make the gooiest in
the middle crunches on the outside
brownies thank you for listening to
today's show you'll find the recipe and
thousands more on BBC good food comm if
you have a minute we'd love to hear from
you on Twitter Facebook or Instagram at
BBC good food
you